This assignment is designed to assess your ability to conduct and critique a simple piece of data analysis.
You may make multiple attempts, the final attempt before the deadline will be marked.
INSTRUCTIONS
***
Gather and record 30 pieces of continuous data from a larger population, such as:
- weight of scoops of rice
- time for you to commute to college
- height of students in the class
Write a report under the following headings, that completes the requested tasks. Your report should not exceed 2 A4 pages of typed 12-point Calibri or equivalent, with 1 inch margins (the default margins in Word). Upload your report as a pdf.
1) Sampling Process
Describe and comment on the sampling process of your data. Is it a simple random sample? (Note: you will *not* be graded on how close your process was to SRS, only on your thoughts about the process. For the remainder of the assignment, assume your sample was taken via SRS.)
2) Data Description
Summarize the characteristics of your data. Graph your data. Comment on the distribution of your data.
Discuss the appropriateness of a) the Z distribution and b) the t distribution for confidence intervals and hypothesis tests on this data. Which is most suitable?
4) Estimation
Using the distribution chosen as most suitable in 3) Calculate a) a 95% confidence interval and b) a 97.5% confidence interval for the mean of the population. Briefly and neatly show your formulas and calculations.  
5) Hypothesis Testing
Let u be the median value of your data. Using the distribution chosen in 3) and significance alpha =0.025, conduct a one-sample hypothesis test for H0: The mean of the population is equal to u. Briefly and neatly show your formulas and calculations.  
What is your conclusion and interpretation of these results?
6) Sample Size
Assume you are interested in taking a sample of data from a similar population, in order to estimate a 99% confidence interval for the mean. Let m be the width of the 95% confidence interval you calculated earlier. Estimate the sample size you would need if you wished for the width of your 99% confidence interval to not exceed m/2. 
Comment on the accuracy of your sample size estimate. Is it reliable?
***